# Advancements in Leukemia Diagnosis using Machine Learning and Image Processing techniques
Repository for the FYP - ML in Healthcare

Leukemia, in particular Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, is a common and fatal disease form that mostly affects adolescents and children. Leukemia treatment choices and patient outcomes needs to be determined based on an accurate and early diagnosis. The present diagnosis procedure entails a number of complicated laboratory tests, which can be costly, time-consuming, and prone to human error. As a result, it is evident that automated diagnosis strategies are needed. One such technique is computer-aided microscopic morphological examination employing machine learning (ML) and image processing techniques.
The process of peripheral blood (PB) screening, which includes image segmentation, feature extraction, and blast cell classification, is explored in the research as an application of ML algorithms. The constraints associated with human diagnosis, expert conflicts, and the labor-intensive nature of monitoring blood samples are addressed through the application of ML and deep learning algorithms. The study is starting with an in-depth examination of the subject and the choice of an acceptable approach.  The selected development method, design considerations, implementation, and a final evaluation of the finished systems are all covered.
The recommended approaches combine traditional techniques with an adoption of a memetic strategy component which utilises several algorithms at various phases in the creation of a Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system for acute leukemia. The systems comprise CNN models based on transfer learning, SVM classifier using shape, colour, and texture features. The revolutionary ViT architecture as well as hybrid CNN-SVM techniques are explored. The performance of the various proposed systems is highly accurate, according to experimental data, which show promising performance. However, the dataset limitations on size and the requirements for additional research on the ViT technique are acknowledged.
The results highlight the importance to determine the appropriate feature sets and comprehend how they relate to acute leukemia blast cell characteristics. Moreover, they offer valuable insights for future developments in leukemia diagnosis and medical image analysis, specifically focusing on hybrid approaches and separation of the different tasks involved in a such CAD system.
